>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
"Gaiam Inspirations,"
and we're broadcasting
from the Sounds True Wake
Up Festival in the
beautiful Rockies
surrounding Estes
Park, Colorado.
So what is prayer?
Is it only talking to God
when you really want something
or when you feel desperate?
Or is it something
that you do when
you go to a place
of religious belief?
Well, joining me today
is David Frenette,
and he's a senior teacher in
the centering prayer movement.
It's a contemporary method
of contemplative prayer.
Welcome.
Thank you for joining me.
>>DAVID FRENETTE:
Thank you, Lisa.
It's good to be here.
>>LISA: So this centering prayer
movement-- when did this start?
>>FRENETTE: As you
say, centering prayer
is a contemporary form of
practice, meditative practice,
that was initiated
about 50 years ago
by some Trappist monks.
The Trappists are
a religious order
within Roman Catholicism who
are responding to the invitation
to bring forth their meditative
wisdom into the modern world.
So they looked back into the
dusty books of the old ages
and into their own
direct experience
and put together this
practice, this methodology,
called centering prayer.
And so it's been taught
for 40 or 50 years,
first by those Trappist monks,
Father Basil Pennington, Father
William Meninger, and Father
Thomas Keating, who is my abba,
or spiritual father, and then
by a broader circle of people
who are not monks or priests.
And it's disseminated
throughout different Christian
denominations, into people who
are-- now would self-identify
as being spiritual but
not religious-- that is,
not in a religious denomination
or a strong church affiliation.
>>LISA: I understand.
So I love this because
the wisdom that
has been brought down
from these monks,
as you say-- I mean, they
spent years and years being
inward, and insightful,
and in silence.
And that sometimes isn't
practical for our modern day
world, yet we want that.
>>FRENETTE: Exactly.
So that's-- the centering
prayer distills that silence,
and the simplicity, and the
solitude from the monastic life
into a simple practice that
someone can do 20 minutes
in the morning or 20 minutes
in the evening and have some
periodic retreat where they can
be more grounded and centered.
But the idea is to live
out the contemplative life
in ordinary life, not in a
rarefied, separate, cloistered
life, away from the world,
because that's what Jesus did.
He seemed to have gone off into
the desert for a period of time
to pray and be transformed
and awakened to his identity--
his deep spiritual identity.
But then, he lived
out that in the world.
He lived that out in
dialogue with people.
>>LISA: Now, do you--
who are you praying to?
Or are you praying to anyone?
Or is it more of a
centering within yourself?
>>FRENETTE: That's
a good question.
So oftentimes, we think of
prayer as talking to God,
or speaking to God, or
at least thinking of God.
But contemplative prayer
is more about listening.
So it's the other side
of the relationship.
Talking to God, speaking
to God is valuable.
But if it's a true
relationship with a living
reality, such as God is to us,
then listening is important.
And as contemplative
prayer deepens,
the listening moves to an
immediate, direct experience
that's more like hearing God,
where the barriers disappear
and the in-dwelling
life of God-- God's
presence within-- one of
the great Christian mystics,
John of the Cross, said, "The
center of the soul is God."
That reality awakens
into one's life,
and then there's a direct
hearing experience.
But the focus is not on
trying to get an experience,
but to open up to a transforming
relationship with God
so that some of the
inner obstacles to being
in life with greater
freedom are diminished,
that neuroses and emotional
programs are lessened,
and then one can be a little
bit more compassionate.
>>LISA: So in that-- I love that
you said it's more of a soul.
Are you praying to the universal
God that is within all things,
including within ourselves?
>>FRENETTE: One's praying to
or in relationship with God--
kind of like the grounded being.
It's the universal presence
that's in all things,
and also, in a sense,
present in all religions.
And so centering
prayer is sometimes
practiced by people who are
not in a conscious relationship
with Christ.
And at the same time,
because it does come out
of this 2000-year-old
tradition--
the Christian monastic
and contemplative life
established-- the life
established by Jesus.
If one has-- if a centering
prayer practitioner has
a relationship with
Christ, they kind of
download into their practice
this additional grace
of the tradition.
So you know how some meditation
practices like mindfulness,
which emerges out of Buddhism?
Mindfulness can be practiced
by people in our society,
and often is, who
are not Buddhist.
And just like Hatha yoga
comes out of Hinduism, but--
>>LISA: It's all a
practical oneness.
>>FRENETTE: It's all
a practical oneness
that people can access without
the religious container.
But centering prayer,
like mindfulness,
like Hatha yoga--
if someone does
open to the religious
quality-- like in centering
prayer, the Christian
contemplative life-- then
that can add a richness
to their experience.
So it's a little
bit of a paradox.
One's accessing this
universal presence of life
that's present everywhere.
>>LISA: Have you ever heard of
the "I am" concept, the "I am"
discourses and the people
believing "I am God."
Have you heard of that concept?
>>FRENETTE: When you
say "I am," you mean--
>>LISA: I am.
>>FRENETTE: Well, describe it
a little more so I understand.
>>LISA: I've heard Wayne
Dyer and various people
say and talk about
the "I am" discourses.
I am God.
I am-- and that's basically
embodying the presence of God.
Have you ever been
familiar with that?
Or do you agree with that?
>>FRENETTE: Well, actually,
it's a fascinating phrase
because part of the revelation
of what the divine is, what God
is, in the
Judeo-Christian tradition,
is that God is, I am.
God speaks God's name as
I am, or "I am that I am,"
or "I am who I will be,"
in the Hebrew translation.
And then, Jesus says, when
he's asked who he was,
he says before "Before
Abraham ever was, I am."
So "I am" is an expression
of the nature of God.
So when one is in
contemplative prayer,
one is in relationship
with the great I am-ness,
which is also the deep
nature of oneself.
So in Christianity, one wouldn't
really say that I am God.
I'm still a human being.
But the divine life is there.
So I haven't read much
of Wayne Dyer's book,
but it's a very valuable--
>>LISA: It's in all the
scriptures, the word I am.
>>FRENETTE: I am, yeah.
It's universal.
And it's a very important
thing to realize
that we're not separate
from the divine.
The divine is here
in us, enfolding us.
>>LISA: How did you get
started on this journey?
What drew you towards this path?
>>FRENETTE: Well,
as a young man,
I wasn't raised with any
religion-- religious training.
And when I was in
college, I began
looking for meaning
in life, searching
for something that
would kind of alleviate
my personal, neurotic
pain and give me
a sense of what life was about.
And I started meditation,
actually, with Buddhism.
I moved from Michigan
to the Bay Area,
which was kind of the mecca
at that time of meditation
in the late '70s.
And I practiced Buddhism
for a few years.
And then, out of
that experience,
even on Buddhist
retreat, I began
to have a sense of a
loving, full presence that
was arising out of the
emptiness, the Sunyata,
that was opened up by
the Buddhist practice.
And it was associated
with Christian symbolism,
with Christ, which was
very surprising to me.
I had no relationship
with Christianity.
I didn't really have a
lot of knowledge of it,
nor any concept that there
was a living meditation
tradition in it.
>>LISA: Yeah, I didn't either.
And I was raised
Catholic, but I never
knew about this centering
prayer movement.
You say it's 50 years--
>>FRENETTE: Yeah,
about 45, 50 years old.
So it's been spread
around in some areas
and in some churches,
but not all churches.
You kind of have to dig
around a little bit for it.
>>LISA: Is that where you were
introduced to Thomas Keating?
>>FRENETTE: I became a
Christian when I was 22 or 23.
>>LISA: By became, you
mean baptised and--
>>FRENETTE: Yeah, that's right.
Yeah.
And then, I immediately
started to-- well,
I was thinking, if I
want to really live
the meditative
life, what do I do?
And of course, the
idea was, well,
then you go become a monk.
But I thought I
didn't really want
to become a monk because
I felt in that tradition,
you kind of isolate yourself
from the world, and perhaps
a little bit from aspects
of my being, emotions,
sexuality, that I didn't
want to isolate myself from.
So I just practiced
in my ordinary life.
And then, about
three or four laters,
I met Thomas Keating--
three or four years later.
>>LISA: How did you meet him?
>>FRENETTE: He came to
Berkeley, where I was living,
to the Unity Church
and gave a talk.
And I thought, oh, is this a
master, a Christian master?
He had been an abbot, and he
had just recently retired,
so he's giving a few
talks here and there.
>>LISA: And so it
resonated with you.
This said this makes-- you
said this makes sense to me.
>>FRENETTE: Yeah.
I had been practicing on
my own for a few years
as a new Christian,
and then I thought,
well, here's a teacher,
and I asked him.
I asked him for some
help, and he said, well,
he's giving this retreat, a
new retreat that he had just
opened up to a small group
of people-- about 12 people.
And he said you can come on it.
And it was held in New Mexico
at this interspiritual retreat
center called the
Lama Foundation.
This was in 1983.
And about 14-day retreat,
and I went there,
and he gave his teaching.
And I thought, well,
this is what I want.
This is what I've been doing.
>>LISA: And so you found
your home, so to speak.
>>FRENETTE: Yeah.
>>LISA: But then, to go on and
actually teach this and embody
this, you took it on
from there on out?
>>FRENETTE: Actually, on that
retreat, there were 12 people,
and most of those people
went on to give their lives
and their full-time work
to the centering prayer,
but it had not really
yet been established.
So we decided to set
up a little meditation
community, a few of
us from that retreat.
And Thomas Keating
was our abba--
>>LISA: Your guide.
>>FRENETTE: Our guide, yeah.
And I lived there for 10
years, like a temporary monk.
>>LISA: Did you seek other work?
Did you get married?
What was your life like?
>>FRENETTE: Well, after-- it
was living it like as a monk,
and serving these
retreats, and living more
about-- learning more about
prayer, and community life,
and service from the
contemplative dimension.
And then, after 10 years,
my commitment was over.
I had made these
renewable commitments.
And so I felt it was time
to move back into the world.
I did, and I got
a graduate degree
and started working
as a counselor.
And I got married,
and that's it.
And here I am.
>>LISA: So you've had the best
of both worlds, essentially,
but been able to practice
within a practical life.
So what are some
of the practices
that you carry into your
life in the centering-- front
the centering prayer movement?
>>FRENETTE: That's
a good question.
So centering prayer
is a sitting practice.
So you come apart, and you--
like zazen or other forms
of meditation.
And then, the idea is
to live it in your life.
So yeah, there are
certain practices
that work with emotions and the
idea being attentive to what's
happening, rather
than lost in thoughts.
Practices that help
with forgiveness.
And contemplative service-- this
idea of contemplative service
is that we're involved in
the world, using our gifts,
helping to aleve the
problems of the world,
but we're letting go of our
own agendas more and more.
So it's trying to offer our
work and our lives as a prayer,
as a movement towards that.
So it's God within us
serving God in other people.
>>LISA: When someone comes
to you that has a problem
or has deep trauma
in their lives,
how do you counsel them
using this type of method?
And maybe this could
help people to understand
the method a lot better.
>>FRENETTE: So the method
of centering prayer,
then, is to have a comfortable
posture and a natural posture,
and to prepare oneself with
a sense of intentionality
in opening up to God,
however you experience that.
And then-- you know, how
we understand God to be--
and then having a
word of one or two
syllables that you
introduce into your mind
to represent or symbolize
your opening of your heart,
your consent to God.
And whenever you're thinking
another thought engaged
with thinking, thinking
about thoughts,
you ever so gently
return to that word.
>>LISA: Is it a word you choose,
or is it always the same word?
>>FRENETTE: It's
the word you choose,
and you keep it
the same over time.
You don't change it practice
period to practice period.
>>LISA: So an example would be--
>>FRENETTE: It could be
the name of God, Jesus,
or it could be open, or
stillness, or Shalom, or be.
You can also use your breath,
so ever so gently just
noticing your breath-- not
concentrating, but just lightly
noticing it.
The breath is actually
a wonderful practice
because at the time
of Jesus, the language
he spoke-- they use the same
word for breath and spirit,
ruach.
So the breath is used in
some contemplative traditions
in Christianity, along
with universally,
as a way of meditation.
And then you do that,
letting go of your thoughts,
opening up to the divine
source of everything.
And then, at the end of a
period of time-- 10 minutes
or 20 minutes-- you
take a little time
to let go of the breath
through the word,
and then you integrate
that experience
into your emotions
and your thoughts,
maybe praying in
a different way,
visualizing what's going
to happen during your day,
and then offering a
blessing from the period
and moving into your day.
>>LISA: In many people's
lives, the pace is very fast,
and especially in our
technology-loving society,
the pace gets very, very fast.
You're always connected.
There's always things going on.
Business and home
life integrate a lot.
So it is-- I love
your idea of spending
this time in the morning.
But what about carrying
it throughout your day?
And when the busy mind happens,
and things don't work out
your way, and it just starts
kind of-- the cascade starts
falling apart--
>>FRENETTE: Yeah.
Then what?
>>LISA: Right.
How do you bring that into
that moment of stress?
>>FRENETTE: That's
the real question.
So there is one
approach that helps
to remain in this kind
of open-heartedness.
I call it heartfulness.
So it's a little like
grounding in the breath, being
attentive to what's happening,
open to what I'm experiencing
in my body, more
present to other people,
and willing to turn to the
divine at any moment of time,
offer gratitude for what is.
So there's like an anchoring
in activity that's helpful.
But I still experience,
and I'm thrown sometimes
by being stressed and
overwhelmed by things.
And then, so there
are other practices.
There's one practice that we
teach in the centering prayer
movement called the
welcoming prayer.
So when emotions get
strong, you know,
it's not just
about wanting to be
mindful, or heartfully present.
If emotions become
triggered, then there's
a way to turn to
God in the emotion.
The tradition of
Christian contemplation
says-- or some
teachers say-- that God
is present in all things,
including every emotion.
So to welcome God
in the feeling,
to learn and practice how to
embrace God, say, in my anxiety
or in my anger--
>>LISA: What about anger, yeah?
How do you embrace God?
If somebody's really, truly
doing something wrong,
how do you embrace
God in that anger?
How do you do that?
>>FRENETTE: Well, again,
that takes practice.
So I would turn
within, take a breath,
feel into the anger in my body.
That's the practice, learning
how to recognize and feel.
So for me, it may be
tightness in my throat.
And then, welcome--
actually kind of say
that word, welcome God within.
And then, let go.
Let go into the moment.
And that takes, oh,
10 seconds, maybe.
>>LISA: But 10
years of practice.
[LAUGHTER]
I'm just kidding.
>>FRENETTE: Well, yeah,
some training is valuable.
And the idea is to kind
of practice and train
with when I'm irritated, before
it builds into anger, before it
builds into rage.
Once it builds into rage, I
kind of have to leave the room,
but then come back.
Come back because, I think
like you're intimating,
there might be a very
valuable-- something
important to engage in
that relationship with.
And so, once the anger
is embraced and found
in the life of God,
then it gives me
a little bit more
energy and freedom
to handle the situation.
>>LISA: So it's also
about speaking your truth.
I mean, when you get to
that place of something's
going wrong and you need to say
something about it, from what
I've studied in terms
of neurochemistry,
there's certain
neurochemicals that
release when you get
to that place of anger,
that it's like your
brain on drugs.
And you really can't-- you reach
the point of no return when you
get to that place.
This contemplative movement,
this idea of centering prayer,
would help release
those neurotoxins,
those neurochemicals,
and get you
back to the place of being
able to speak your voice.
>>FRENETTE: Yes, it does.
>>LISA: That makes
a lot of sense.
>>FRENETTE: Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, so to have the
energy transformed
and the anger so that the
biochemicals are reduced
in the body, and then the
energy behind the emotion
maybe is transformed.
So it's still about engaging
energy, but without the rage.
>>LISA: That makes sense.
>>FRENETTE: Toxicity.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And so I'm just asking
you different ways
to be able to bring this into
life and different examples
of how to bring this into life.
How do you feel about
families and young families
and young people moving away
from the organized religion
and seeking something
else, where they can still
teach their kids morality,
and spirituality,
and the essence of
God, but yet there's
no house to do it in any longer?
>>FRENETTE: It's such
an interesting time
that we live in because some
of those institutions-- a lot
of Christian churches
are diminishing,
and at the same
time, the internet
is just changing everything.
And your work is a part of that.
So you can reach out to people
and provide resources to them.
And Thomas Keating
had no idea, really,
how to reach out into the
world with his message
of contemplative prayer.
But 35 years ago,
some of those people
from that retreat
and others began
to help him with organizing
small groups oriented
towards centering
prayer and the ability
to live the contemplative
life in ordinary life.
And some of them are in
churches, those groups
and meditation resources,
but some are not.
But I think you're really asking
a very important question.
I think we're in
the midst of it,
and it's just happening
all around us.
>>LISA: Attendance is
down, and the media
has portrayed the
Catholic Church
as a place where there's a
lot of deceit and sinning.
So I don't know if that's
really all happening
or if it's just the media.
There's so many different
conspiracy theories
and so forth that
you could go after.
But we are losing our faith
as a population-- in the US,
probably, I can just speak
for-- in these organized
senses of religion.
So people are looking, seeking
for something that can still
raise a family, help you
deal with life in a way that
is moral, and honest,
and forgiving.
How is what you do
different than meditation?
>>FRENETTE:
Meditation-- you mean
like from Buddhism or Hinduism?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FRENETTE: Well, there
are a lot of similarities
because both the
centering prayer
and those great
meditative traditions
emphasize practice and
emphasize coming out
of a living tradition of
practitioners for many years,
and opening up to a mystery
that's not necessarily
about dogma and belief
alone, but about experience
and the transformation of the
structures of consciousness.
I'm trained in
psychology, so that's
like a unifying language now
between all the religions.
So there are similarities, and
there's a sense of difference,
too, and uniqueness, I think,
to all the great traditions.
I guess if you
climb a mountain--
and your question
is are those paths
leading to the same place?
So is the meditative
path of Buddhism
leading to the same
place on the mountain?
Is the Christian contemplative
path leading to the same place?
Well, within that metaphor,
I think, probably, they
are leading to the same place.
But maybe they're different
routes up the mountain--
>>LISA: To get there.
>>FRENETTE: To get there-- open
up a slightly different view,
and they're slightly different
paths and everything,
but I trust that the
summit, or the depths,
if you don't want
to use that kind
of heightened, hierarchical
imagery, is the same.
So in centering prayer,
one of the differences
that's probably unique, if not
exclusive, to centering prayer
is this idea of relationship.
So that practice with the sacred
breath or the sacred word,
it's about intentionality.
In, say, mindfulness meditation
coming from Buddhism,
the practice is a
profound practice,
but perhaps it's more about
attention and awareness.
You're changing and transforming
your attention/awareness
as you go up that mountaintop.
>>LISA: That's a huge
piece, especially when we're
in this place of diffused
awareness and diffused
attention.
To have a practice that
allows you to get back
to that place of centering
and attention/awareness
is a great, great
idea-- helps lower
stress and all sorts of things.
Could you give us an
example or take us
through a little bit
of a centering prayer?
And I know it's-- we just
have a short amount of time,
but is that something
that you could do with us?
>>FRENETTE: Oh, to
offer some guidance?
>>LISA: Yeah, right now.
>>FRENETTE: Oh, sure.
>>LISA: That would be great.
>>FRENETTE: Just
give me a sense.
Two minutes?
Three minutes?
>>LISA: Yeah, exactly.
That would be great
so that we could
get the experience of
what you're talking about,
rather than just
talking about it.
>>FRENETTE: That's a great idea.
>>LISA: I would love it.
>>FRENETTE: So a
comfortable posture,
so I'm going to
sit more upright,
but without a sense of rigidity.
And I invite you into that.
You look pretty comfortable.
>>LISA: I am.
I'm very comfortable.
I'm very supported,
and I love this space.
So thank you.
>>FRENETTE: And you
have a little cushion,
so you're erect
without being rigid.
And the eyes closed--
let's take a breath.
And so just to prepare,
there are three segments
to centering prayer-- the
initial, preparatory moment,
and then the body of
the practice, and then
the conclusion.
So just prepare
by perhaps calling
to mind your own sense of the
divine, your own sense of who
or what God is for you now.
And that could be God,
or it could be life.
It could be a mystery
that you're not sure of.
But just call that to mind.
And have a sense of
opening your mind and heart
to the presence of the divine
as you know that to be.
And now, rather than
thinking about God,
let a word come to you
of one or two syllables
that expresses
your "yes" to God.
It could be yes.
It could be God.
It could be Shalom.
And let it come to you
as if it were floating up
from the depths of
a deep pool of water
to the surface of your mind.
And then, just
listen to that word
as it prays itself in your mind.
That is, rather than trying
to grind away on the word,
let the word be there.
Let it exist on the
stream of consciousness
with other thoughts.
Ever so gently,
return to it when
you're thinking about
another thought.
And in this moment,
just be willing to let
go of the word, the
form, and rest your mind
and heart in openness.
And then, of course, you'll
begin thinking again.
Return to the word.
And because this is a quick
dose, let go of the word.
And then, as you move into
conclusion, just take a moment
and perhaps offer
a prayer in words
quietly within for
the suffering world,
for someone or some
situation in life.
Amen.
>>LISA: Mmm.
Thank you.
That was beautiful.
Can I share my experience?
>>FRENETTE: Yes, please do.
>>LISA: My word was thank you.
I'm always in that place of
deep gratitude for whatever's
going on in my life, and it's
always been my first prayer.
And when you said my mind
was wandering, of course
it was wandering.
And I got back to-- and when
you said let go of the word
and let it just be, that is
such a great metaphor for life.
Whatever things are happening
in life, they are happening.
And sometimes, letting them be
and not pushing and resisting
against them-- just
that practice of letting
it drop and float was a
beautiful metaphor for me
in life.
>>FRENETTE: That's
a wonderful insight.
>>LISA: That was wonderful.
>>FRENETTE: Yeah, because
contemplative prayer
is like learning to float.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
It is.
I got that.
>>FRENETTE: Yeah, where you
kind of are in the pool,
and you're just trusting in
an unseen presence that's
going to support you.
So you can let go of thoughts.
You can let go of the word.
But it's a support, to
thank and to offer that--
but ultimately, it's
about just being.
Just being.
>>LISA: That state-- I'm sorry.
That state is-- yes, I did.
I tend to have the busy
mind, but that's what I do.
And that state was--
it was-- floating
was a great word
for it because I
seem to have lost
that grounding.
Even though I love
to be grounded,
sometimes it's nice to just
release from that grounding
and reestablish
it in a new space.
>>FRENETTE: Exactly.
So to be still-- to be still
and know that God is God,
that this is life-- and then
that little portion at the end.
Again, that was a
real quick experience,
but your awareness
just opened up
to it-- of then ending
with the thank you--
the form of the
thank you-- and then
having a little time
to practice or pray.
And if you were really
doing the centering prayer,
you would really develop
that so that you could then
integrate that ground,
that silent ground,
into your thoughts
and emotions in life.
Because it's not like we want
to walk around being spacey.
But to have that freedom,
to have that experience--
a deepening experience
of inner freedom,
and then integrate that freedom
into the movements of life--
>>LISA: Yes.
If you think about walking
around in your daily life,
you get hooked and corded by
various things, people, events,
moments.
And throughout the
day, if you have
a moment where you can
just release those cords,
you get to restore your energy.
And that's essentially
what that gives you
the opportunity to do.
So a question about
the end-- so I
don't know if this is
my Catholic upbringing,
but I tend to ask for things
for myself-- sometimes
health, healing, whatever's
going on in my life
at that moment.
I extend that to my family.
And sometimes, I forget to
extend it beyond to the world
because I don't feel-- there's
a certain-- I want more
of a focus, and it
seems so broad to me.
How do I take that broadness
of world peace and pray
for something that
seems so ambiguous?
I guess my mental
monkey mind wants
to grab on to the solution.
It does, yeah.
>>FRENETTE: Well, one thing
that might be helpful, or see
what this is like-- have the
attitude of that silent-- that
period of gratitude, like
the centering prayer.
We're really uniting
ourselves with everybody
at the depths of existence.
So it's kind of a prayer for
everyone when we do that.
And yet, at the same
time, sometimes it's
valuable at the end to
remember particular needs.
But if your heart opens
to your family, you know,
that's what's relevant.
That's what's here.
>>LISA: OK.
So not judging myself about it.
>>FRENETTE: Yeah, I
think it's beautiful.
>>LISA: I think this
could go on and on
about letting go of judgment,
letting go of self-judgment.
And I'm sure you--
so when you're
teaching this, what are
the questions that come up
from people?
What are the biggest questions
that arise in your classes?
>>FRENETTE: It
depends on the class.
If it's an introductory
class, it's
usually about how
to do the practice.
Actually, you asked a
question a few minutes ago,
which is more representative
of an advanced question.
I think you asked
something about how would I
counsel someone with trauma
or psychological issues.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FRENETTE: So taking
that up a little bit,
catching that question again.
The centering prayer and some
of those auxiliary practices
that I mentioned are great
helps for being in the world.
But as a trained
psychotherapist,
I wouldn't recommend
them as being
exclusive of other forms
of assistance-- body work,
therapy, good
support, being rooted
with good medical-- alternative
medicine and regular medicine.
And sometimes, people come
into a meditation class
or they get into a
practice of meditation,
and they think,
well, this is going
to be my answer for everything.
And I think actually, honestly,
it's the most profound answer,
to touch into what
we're talking about.
But to live that
out in the world,
I recommend taking advantage
of the supports that
have been developed.
There's something called
spiritual bypassing,
this attitude that if I'm a
real spiritual practitioner,
I can bypass everything else,
rather than take advantage,
and listen, and
learn from what I
need to have in my life,
especially support.
Our society is kind of isolated.
We lose connection with people.
>>LISA: Yes, and
in a sense, develop
some type of a spiritual
ignorance of what else
is around, what is going on,
and-- a disconnection that way.
And I'm all about
bridging that gap.
That's, I think, one of
the main-- my main passions
is bridging the gap of
deeply profound practices
to the practical daily
life of ordinary people
who go through stressors in
life, and it hooks you in.
>>FRENETTE: That's it.
That's part of our reality.
>>LISA: It is.
>>FRENETTE: Respond to it.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
It's part of our reality.
>>FRENETTE: And that's--
your point about religion.
I think religion, then, needs
to respond to people's life
in this world.
>>LISA: It's a bit
disconnected because it's
held on to the tradition.
And I understand the tradition,
and it's deep, and it's rooted.
But there's got to be a way
for the tradition to exist
and at the same time to make
it practical to modern life.
And this is a nice balance.
This is a nice kind of
stepping stone on that path.
>>FRENETTE: Yeah, I think
it's one helpful contribution
to that.
But I think that's the
challenge for religion
and religious institutions,
and all of society.
We're in this evolving
world, and what's
the relevance from the past
that needs to be updated?
That was the
original inspiration
for centering prayer, to bring
forth this contemplative wisdom
out of the monasteries
so it could
be relevant to people's lives.
>>LISA: Well, I
love the mission.
And I think-- this is
just my personal opinion,
but going back to the trauma.
In this day and age,
when things move so fast,
little events happen
in our daily lives
that are traumatic, that
do get stored in the body.
They don't have to be major
life-changing traumas.
It could be a bad
rapport with somebody,
exchanged words
that are hurtful.
It could be-- those little
things register in our bodies
as traumas during the day.
We stack them up at
night, go to sleep,
and start all over the next day.
There's got to be a way
to be able to release
those mini-- mini crises
throughout your day,
and this is a good
way to do that.
>>FRENETTE: It's a good way
to help with that process.
My abba, Thomas Keating,
he has this image
that the divine, God,
in this relationship
is a divine psychotherapist--
>>LISA: Oh, that's great.
>>FRENETTE: --who is
helping to heal that.
But again, I think that some
of the traumas and the pace--
just as you're saying,
the pace of life--
is inherently traumatic for us.
>>LISA: It definitely
has those-- yeah,
those days happen.
>>FRENETTE: That we need a
lot of other things, too.
>>LISA: I think I want
to go back to your point
at the beginning
about listening,
about that inner
psychotherapist.
I love that concept of asking
the divine, or whatever
it is that your presence
is, what can I do?
What is the solution?
How can I heal?
What is this?
What is the-- that is not
in my current awareness?
What can-- and then,
just to listen.
>>FRENETTE: To listen, yeah.
>>LISA: And it's
usually always there.
I don't know if it
comes from our own minds
or if it really does
come from the divine.
What do you think?
>>FRENETTE: I think it
comes from the divine,
but of course, it's filtered
through our own minds.
So I like this image that
you're kind of describing--
to ask, and then to listen,
and to ask again, and listen.
It's like-- it is a
living relationship.
And then, we get more in touch
with the divine, I think.
>>LISA: Are there any
other profound teachings
that you want to share with us
from your journey with Thomas
Keating or your entire
journey with the movement?
>>FRENETTE: I think
I would just like
to emphasize for myself
and for the people
that I know and
work with that it
is a journey into being
more and more human.
This is this traditional
teaching in Christianity
that, through this
contemplative process,
one is divinized, meaning that
the life of God awakens and one
becomes divinized.
But I also think, for me, it's
becoming more and more human.
>>LISA: That's a great point.
>>FRENETTE: Yeah,
so-- just who I am.
>>LISA: Great point.
Well, thank you so much for
enlightening me and sharing
with me with your whole process.
I didn't look at my
notes at all because they
had nothing to do with
what we just talked about.
>>FRENETTE: Yeah, Lisa.
[LAUGHTER]
Thank you for having me.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
I appreciate it.
And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with David Frenette, you can go
back and watch the meditation
as well and take
your time with that.
You can go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.